what you're looking at here are the five
rules of programming written by the
legendary programmer Rob Pike who
programmed the go programming language
the first rule of programming is do not
talk about programming the second rule
of programming is to measure don't tune
for Speed until you've measured and even
then don't unless one part of the code
overwhelms the rest this Echoes another
legendary programmer Donald canth who
offered similar advice when he said
premature optimization is the root of
all evil even my dad would tell me
measure twice cut once in programming
there's a nearly Unlimited a number of
ways to skin a cat but the way you write
your code matters like as we'll see in
JavaScript there's at least four
different ways to Loop over an array and
count its values but the performance of
each technique varies dramatically in
today's video I'll show you how to
easily Benchmark your JavaScript code so
you can scientifically measure its
performance and avoid wasting time
optimizing red herrings to help us make
benchmarking extremely easy we're going
to use the JavaScript runtime Dino which
has a built-in benchmarking tool after
playing around with it for a few days I
was able to achieve some amazing things
like I figured out how to make array
includes 100,000 times faster I was able
to write a sorting algorithm that
outperforms the built-in array sort
method in JavaScript and I figured out
the fastest way to write a loop let's
take a look at how Doo bench works at
first you'll want to make sure you have
Doo 2 installed and I also want to point
out that this video is part of my full
Dino course which is now officially in
production and should be out around
November 7th which will include about 25
videos and multiple projects the other
thing I want to point out is that we're
measuring JavaScript and its performance
only on the doo runtime which under the
hood is powered by the V8 engine which
also Powers all chromium browsers and
no. JS however if you're looking to
compare performance between different
run times like node Dino and Bun I'd
highly recommend this video from Anton
Putra which puts all three of them to
the test in a large scale Cloud
environment but now let's jump into the
code and answer the question what is the
fastest way to Loop over an array in
JavaScript well I know of at least four
different ways to do it which I've
represented in these four functions
where the goal is to Loop over an array
and then sum up the numbers in that
array first up we've got the array for
each method if you have an array one
option is to use for each provide it
with a callback function that mutates a
variable that works but there is a
cleaner way to do this with array reduce
which also takes a callback function but
also has an accumulated value is so
there's no need to mutate that variable
you'll see functional declarative code
like this a lot in front-end projects
like reactjs however the next option is
to increment the sum using a regular
four Loop in JavaScript you can create a
four of Loop that will automatically
iterate to the end of the array that's
nice and readable but the traditional
way to write a for Loop is to use this
more explicit syntax where we have a
variable of I that's incremented as we
Loop over the array's length and that
gives us four ways to solve the same
problem but the big question is which
one will perform the best well the first
thing we'll do is create some testing
data like in this case generate a large
array with 100,000 elements in it and
now finally this is where Doo bench
comes in on the global Dino namespace
you can call the bench method and then
either provide it with a regular
function to Benchmark or provide it with
an object so you can give each Benchmark
a name and then the FN property will
take a function which is the actual code
that you want to run and measure in this
file we'll use doench to set up a
benchmark for each one of our functions
it also helps to set up a baseline which
would typically be your original code
and in this case I'm going to set that
as our traditional for Loop in Doo these
benchmarks don't actually affect your
runtime code but they act more like
testing code and the way to execute the
benchmarks is to open up the terminal
and run the doench command followed by
the file name it'll take a few seconds
to run but it gives us this report that
shows how many iterations of the
function it was able to run per second
and its average execution time as well
as the best case and worst case
performance but at a high level the most
useful thing is just the summary that
shows us which function is fastest and
surprisingly the traditional for Loop is
significantly faster than the others and
you might be wondering why is that well
the main reason is that it doesn't have
abstraction or function call Overhead
like the four of loop uses the iterator
protocol to achieve that syntactic sugar
and array for each and reduce require a
function call after each iteration that
a traditional for Loop doesn't have but
the input data matters like if we bump
up the number of elements in the array
to a million you can see that the
benefits of the traditional for Loop
increase significantly and now we're
getting a 5x performance boost or more
but here's the weird part if we reduce
the array's length down to about 100 the
performance becomes almost even and
actually array reduce beats the
traditional for Loop so I think the main
takeway way here is that the type of
loop you use doesn't really matter
unless you're looping over massive
arrays in which case you'll want to use
a traditional for Loop pretty
interesting but now I want to show you
an optimization that can have a massive
impact on performance when searching for
a value in an array so in this function
I'm generating some testing data that
creates a massive array containing
product IDs user IDs and emails but then
I created another array with 1,000
values which contain some matching
values that we want to see if we can
find in the big array in vanilla
JavaScript the typical way to do this is
to use array includes which is a
function that will Loop over the array
until it finds a matching value and then
return a Boolean of true or false in Big
O that would give us o of n performance
but there's an alternative and more
clever way to solve this problem we can
take the original array and create a set
data structure a set will index
everything by unique value and has a
method called has that will tell us if
that value exists in the set pretty
simple but now let's run our Benchmark
this time the performance difference is
staggering array includes was only able
to solve the problem 4.9 times per
second while set lookup was able to do
the same thing 4.5 million times per
second or in other words a million times
faster the reason it's so dramatic is
because set has o of one performance the
unique values are already indexed so it
doesn't need to Loop over the entire
array it's the same basic concept as
creating an index in a relational
database now if you're only using array
includes on a small number of elements
it's probably not worth it to create a
set because there is some overhead in
creating that index but if you have a
large data set it's definitely worth it
but now let's talk about sorting arrays
there are many ways to do this and I
even have a video that compares 10
different sorting algorithms visually
but JavaScript also has a built-in array
sort method and I was curious to see if
I could beat it by implementing three
different sorting algorithms like bubble
sort quick sort and merge sort I'm not
going to go over the implementation in
detail but bubble sort is generally
considered the simplest algorithm but
not very
performant while quicksort is a divide
and conquer algorithm that is generally
considered to be the fastest sorting
algorithm for most use
[Music]
cases and then merge sort which is also
a divide and conquer algorithm that can
perform really well on certain data
structures in this Benchmark I'm going
to sort an array of 10,000 elements
we'll use the JavaScript sort function
as our Baseline and when we run this
Benchmark we get some pretty interesting
results bubble sort obviously sucks big
time merge sort has pretty similar
performance but quick sort is almost
three times faster that's pretty
impressive but why is that well part of
it has to do with the overhead of
function calls and sort but it also
really depends on the thing that you're
actually sorting like in this case
quicksort is able to do a really good
job with numbers but let's see what
happens if we change the actual test
data to an array of strings when we run
the same Benchmark but with strings
quick sort is still faster but only just
a little bit the bottom line is that in
JavaScript sort is probably fast enough
for most use cases and the fourth rule
of programming is that fancy algorithms
are buggier than simple ones and they're
much harder to Implement use Simple
algorithms as well as simple data
structures but if you're really looking
to optimize a sorting algorithm you
probably shouldn't be messing around
with JavaScript and instead use a
systems language like C or rust Doo
itself is actually written in Rust while
the bun JavaScript runtime is written in
Zig and nodejs and C++ pretty
interesting but I think the main thing I
learned through all this benchmarking is
that virtually all the built-in stuff is
good enough benchmarking is fun but it's
far more important to get your code
working first and that brings us back to
the first rule of programming you can't
tell where a program is going to spend
its time bottlenecks occur in surprising
places so don't try to second guess and
put in a speed hack until you've proven
that's where the bottleneck is and the
way you prove that is by measuring with
tools like Dino bench make sure to check
out the full Dino course when it comes
out next week and here's a discount code
for making it to the end of this video
thanks for watching and I will see you
in the next one